<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_petitions_and_the_ombudsmen/2025-05-27/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_petitions_and_the_ombudsmen/2025-05-27/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2025-05-27" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/34/joint_committee_on_public_petitions_and_the_ombudsmen"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_petitions_and_the_ombudsmen/2025-05-27/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_petitions_and_the_ombudsmen/2025-05-27/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2025-05-27" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_petitions_and_the_ombudsmen/2025-05-27/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_petitions_and_the_ombudsmen/2025-05-27/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2025-05-29" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="AlbertDolan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Albert-Dolan.D.2024-11-29" showAs="Albert Dolan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="BrendanSmith" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Brendan-Smith.D.1992-12-14" showAs="Brendan Smith"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="ChrisAndrews" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Chris-Andrews.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Chris Andrews"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="DavidMaxwell" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/David-Maxwell.D.2024-11-29" showAs="David Maxwell"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PatBuckley" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Pat-Buckley.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Pat Buckley"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PaulMcAuliffe" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Paul-McAuliffe.D.2020-02-08" showAs="Paul McAuliffe"/>
        <TLCRole eId="An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" href="/ie/oireachtas/role/office/an_cathaoirleach_gníomhach" showAs="An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COMHCHOISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL AGUS NA HOMBUDSMAIN</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Joint Committee on Public Petitions and the Ombudsmen</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2025-05-27">Dé Máirt, 27 Bealtaine 2025</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2025-05-27">Tuesday, 27 May 2025</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 11:00 a.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 11:00 a.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#PatBuckley">Pat Buckley</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#ChrisAndrews">Chris Andrews.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#RoryHearne">Rory Hearne</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#DavidMaxwell">David Maxwell</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#PaulMcAuliffe">Paul McAuliffe,+</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_8">
                  <person refersTo="#BrendanSmith">Brendan Smith.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">+ In éagmais le haghaidh cuid den choiste / In the absence for part of the meeting of Deputy Brendan Smith.</summary>
          <summary eId="sum_5">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#AlbertDolan">Teachta / Deputy Albert Dolan sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Election of Temporary Chairman<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:00:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Clerk to the Committee<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:05:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_9">As we have a quorum, the meeting can start. As the Chair is unavoidably absent I invite nominations for the election of a temporary Chair.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#ChrisAndrews" eId="spk_2">
          <from>Senator Chris Andrews<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:05:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_10">I propose Deputy Dolan.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PatBuckley" eId="spk_3">
          <from>Deputy Pat Buckley<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:05:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_11">I second the nomination. </p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_4">
          <from> Clerk to the Committee<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:05:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_12">As there are no other nominations I invite Deputy Dolan to take the Chair.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6">
          <i>Deputy Albert Dolan took the Chair.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_3">
        <heading>Election of Leas-Chathaoirleach<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:05:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#AlbertDolan" as="#An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" eId="spk_5">
          <from>An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach (Deputy Albert Dolan)<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:05:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_13">Unfortunately, the Chair is unavoidably absent. I have received apologies from Deputy Brendan Smith, who is on his way.</p>
          <p eId="para_14"> I advise members of the constitutional requirement that they must be physically present within the confines of the Leinster House complex in order to participate in public meetings. I will not permit a member to participate when they are not adhering to this constitutional requirement. Therefore, a member who attempts to participate from outside the precincts will be asked to leave the meeting. I ask any members participating via Microsoft Teams that prior to making their contribution to the meeting, they confirm they are on the grounds of the Leinster House campus.</p>
          <p eId="para_15">Members are also reminded of the long-standing parliamentary practice that they should not criticise or make charges against any person or entity by name or in such a way as to make him, her or it identifiable or otherwise engage in speech that might be regarded as damaging to the good name of the person or entity. Therefore, if their statements are potentially defamatory in relation to an identifiable person or entity, I will direct them to discontinue their remarks. It is imperative that members comply with any such direction.</p>
          <p eId="para_16"> Before we begin consideration of the agenda items scheduled, I would like to take the opportunity to introduce members to the team who will provide secretariat support to the committee. The committee secretariat team who will support us in our work are clerk to the committee, Martha Dowling; policy adviser, Alex Alino; junior clerk, Barbara Hughes; and clerical officer, Margaret O'Donnell. The contact details for staff were circulated to members in advance of this meeting. The clerk and her team are readily available to assist members and address queries relating to the committee's work. I thank them all for their diligent work. </p>
          <p eId="para_17"> The first item on the agenda is the nomination for Leas-Chathaoirleach. As agreed at the first meeting of the committee, one nomination for the position of Leas-Chathaoirleach was received.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#ChrisAndrews" eId="spk_6">
          <from>Senator Chris Andrews<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_18">Yes, that is fine. </p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AlbertDolan" as="#An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" eId="spk_7">
          <from>An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach (Deputy Albert Dolan)<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_19">I had nominated Deputy Brendan Smith in advance of the meeting and I spoke to him this morning. Are there any other nominations for the position of Leas-Chathaoirleach?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PaulMcAuliffe" eId="spk_8">
          <from>Deputy Paul McAuliffe<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_20">To clarify, has Deputy Smith agreed to accept the nomination of Vice Chair?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AlbertDolan" as="#An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" eId="spk_9">
          <from>An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach (Deputy Albert Dolan)<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_21">No, but I do not want to say that when he is not here. </p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PaulMcAuliffe" eId="spk_10">
          <from>Deputy Paul McAuliffe<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_22">That is fine.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AlbertDolan" as="#An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" eId="spk_11">
          <from>An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach (Deputy Albert Dolan)<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_23">Do members wish to defer the election until next week or deal with it now? </p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#DavidMaxwell" eId="spk_12">
          <from>Deputy David Maxwell<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_24">I nominate Deputy Albert Dolan for Vice Chair.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PaulMcAuliffe" eId="spk_13">
          <from>Deputy Paul McAuliffe<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_25">I second that.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#ChrisAndrews" eId="spk_14">
          <from>Senator Chris Andrews<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_26">I have no problem with that.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#DavidMaxwell" eId="spk_15">
          <from>Deputy David Maxwell<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_27">If Deputy Dolan is agreeable to doing it. </p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AlbertDolan" as="#An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" eId="spk_16">
          <from>An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach (Deputy Albert Dolan)<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_28">I will confirm whether it is okay to take the nomination. </p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PatBuckley" eId="spk_17">
          <from>Deputy Pat Buckley<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_29">Two nominations may mean a deferral until next week.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AlbertDolan" as="#An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" eId="spk_18">
          <from>An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach (Deputy Albert Dolan)<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_30">Deputy Smith is on his way so I suggest we defer the election until near the end of this meeting so he will have to arrive and we can make a decision then. Is that fair?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PatBuckley" eId="spk_19">
          <from>Deputy Pat Buckley<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_31">Perfect.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PaulMcAuliffe" eId="spk_20">
          <from>Deputy Paul McAuliffe<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_32">The Deputy has demonstrated his good chairperson experience.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AlbertDolan" as="#An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" eId="spk_21">
          <from>An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach (Deputy Albert Dolan)<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_33">So that is agreed. The next item on the agenda will be dealt with in private session and we will resume later in public session to conclude the election of Leas-Chathaoirleach.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_7">
          <i>The joint committee went into private session at 11.12 a.m. and resumed in public session at 11.29 a.m. </i>
        </summary>
        <speech by="#AlbertDolan" as="#An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" eId="spk_22">
          <from>An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach (Deputy Albert Dolan)<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:25:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_34">I will start at No. 1, with nominations for Leas-Chathaoirleach as agreed at the first meeting of the committee. One nomination for the position has been received. I understand that Deputy Smith has withdrawn.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#BrendanSmith" eId="spk_23">
          <from>Deputy Brendan Smith<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:25:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_35">Absolutely. </p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AlbertDolan" as="#An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" eId="spk_24">
          <from>An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach (Deputy Albert Dolan)<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:25:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_36">I invite members to make any nominations they may have for the position of Leas-Chathaoirleach.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#DavidMaxwell" eId="spk_25">
          <from>Deputy David Maxwell<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:25:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_37">I nominate Deputy Dolan as Vice Chair for this committee.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#BrendanSmith" eId="spk_26">
          <from>Deputy Brendan Smith<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_38">I second the nomination.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AlbertDolan" as="#An_Cathaoirleach_Gníomhach" eId="spk_27">
          <from>An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach (Deputy Albert Dolan)<recordedTime time="2025-05-27T11:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_39">Are there any other nominations? No.</p>
          <p eId="para_40"> As there is only one nomination, is the question "That Deputy Albert Dolan be elected Leas-Chathaoirleach of the Joint Committee on Public Petitions and the Ombudsmen." agreed? Agreed. I declare myself elected as Leas-Chathaoirleach. I congratulate the newly-elected Leas-Chathaoirleach on the position and I look forward to working with everyone on the committee and with our Cathaoirleach, who unfortunately could not be here.</p>
          <p eId="para_41"> That question is agreed. As part of procedure I want to make sure I have it right. It is right. Perfect. I thank members for the meeting. I now go to the last item. As we have proceeded through all the other items in private session, the meeting stands adjourned.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_8">The joint committee adjourned at 11.31 a.m. until 11 a.m. on Tuesday, 10 June 2025.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
